In the previous video, I showed several code
with a try-catch block in the main method,
catching an error of the most generic type,
throwable, which is the catch-all for all exceptions.
At a minimum, the try-catch block looks like the following,
which catches nothing and does nothing.
You go try, left to right curly braces,
catch and then throwable t in parentheses,
then we've got another left to right curly brace.
That they're also unlike other statements,
such as if and else,
the enclosing left to right curly brace sets are required.
Alternatively, you can replace the catch clause
with a finally clause.
Just declaring a try clause without either a catch
or finally clause results in a compiler error.
Any exception that occurs in a statement
wrapped by the try block
will immediately stop the instruction set
at the statement that triggered the error,
and fall through to the catch statement.
In other words, all statements after the offending statement
will be skipped.
If an error occurs in a loop or nested loop
and the try block is outside of the loop,
the code breaks out of any participating loops.
All right, let's create a new class
in our exceptions project.
I'm gonna call this one TryCatchExamples.
So, you can see
that I've got three system.out.printIn statements,
the second of which has a divide by zero forced error,
and I'm also including the method
that I included in the previous video,
which shows the exceptions class hierarchy.
Let's run this now.
And you can see from this output
the error occurred at statement two in the try-block
and skipped statement three, falling to the catch block,
we can see that it's a runtime exception
and unchecked exception.
We actually weren't required to include the statement
in the try-catch block.
Right, so let's change our code a little bit.
What we're going to do is
add a try-catch that ignores the runtime exception.
So, what I'm gonna do is on this line here,
we're gonna replace that with that code,
as you can see there.
We've got a try-catch surrounding that statement.
So, basically, we've nested a try-catch in a try block.
Now when the error occurs,
it falls through to the first wrapping catch,
which does nothing, effectively hiding the error.
So, let's confirm that by running it.
You can see the output statement one is just fine.
Statement three is just fine.
So, you could wrap every statement in a try-catch
if you never wanted to miss a statement,
but in general, an error is a significant event,
and you may not want to proceed with succeeding code.
You can design placement
of your try-catch blocks strategically
to allow flow in some instances and break flow in others.
So, let's modify our code a bit and create a method
that will have our three statements in it.
Right, so we're gonna go down
and paste in our method at the bottom,
there it is there.
And what we're gonna do now is now that we've got that,
we're gonna go back up to our main method,
we're gonna replace all the code in the main method
with the following code.
So, now we're gonna try calling the new method
before the try-catch in the try block
and after the try-catch block.
Since we're passing a parameter, divisor equals zero,
our runtime exception should be thrown in each case.
One thing to point out here is that the code compiles,
and this is because the runtime exception
is an unchecked exception.
So, if you now execute the code,
and you can see the output
at the bottom of the screen there,
the error occurred and execution completely stopped
because we executed the method
outside of our try-catch block.
And obviously, you can see the error there was on line 38,
and that's obviously the error
caused by the two divided by divisor,
and we parsed the argument of zero to cause an error.
And you go back up to line 11, and there's the statement
outside of the try-block that caused it.
Right, so let's make a change here.
We're gonna change the code divisor argument
from zero to one here on line 11,
which is basically the first code
to the print three statements, as you can see.
Execute the code,
and this time I got a different result.
So, this code demonstrates
that the code after the try-catch statement
in the main method was also executed.
We caught the error in try-block and handled it,
in this case, we just print information about it,
and continued execution of code after the catch statement.
And obviously, you can see the output in try-block,
statement one is just fine.
And we've got a error that's caught down there,
then after try-catch, in the output as well.
Still crashing on the same line,
which is the two divided by the divisor,
that's parsed as an argument
to the print three statements method.
So, basically here, we demonstrated that
try-catch blocks can be placed around a single statement,
or a block of statements,
and there are no rules about where in the method
you put a try-catch statement.
So, let's talk a bit more about the catch block now.
We've demonstrated catching an error of top throwable,
which catches all errors, this is not best practise.
It's more likely that you'll wanna handle
different types of errors in different ways,
and you can do this by defining more than one catch block.
Right, so what I'm gonna do
is replace the try-catch statements in the main method
of the try-catch examples class,
basically surrounding a code, pasting a new code,
and what I'm gonna need to do is accept both imports here.
And you can see both imports were added.
So, here we now have two catch blocks,
one for an IO exception,
and the other, a catch-all throwable.
Now, we actually are introducing a forced error
in this catch clause, and you can see that on line 22.
Let's run the code.
And this output demonstrates that the catch blocks
are not like switch case labels.
The error thrown in the IO exception catch block
does not then fall through to the catch block for throwable.
These blocks are evaluated in the same context
and are mutually exclusive.
Because of this, the execution actually terminates
in the IO exception catch block
because of the uncaught error thrown in it.
All right, so let's end this video here.
In the next video, we'll look at the finally clause.
See you in the next video.